README.md, before:

<img src="src/main/resources/assets/hermes/icon.png" width="128" alt="Hermes Logo">

# Hermes

Hermes is a mod that outputs a lot of information about the game for external tools to use. It provides no configuration
or in-game functionality.

## Features

### `[PID].json`

On initialize, a json file named [PID].json (PID = process id) will be placed in a global location and contain the game
path, Hermes world log path, game version, all fabric mods loaded (display names, ids, versions), and disabled
features (other mods can disable Hermes features). A shared lock is held on the file to indicate the instance is still
alive. The file should be deleted on exit, but bad shutdowns may lead to the file lingering. A copy of the file will
also be made in `[Game Directory]/hermes/instances/`, and will also be locked and deleted on exit.

Locations:

- For all platforms, inside the game directory:
  `[Game Directory]/hermes/instances/[PID].json`
- Windows (if LOCALAPPDATA is defined):
  `C:\Users\[User]\AppData\Local\MCSRHermes\instances\[PID].json`
- Windows (if LOCALAPPDATA is not defined, but APPDATA is):
  `C:\Users\[User]\AppData\Roaming\MCSRHermes\instances\[PID].json`
- Windows (if LOCALAPPDATA and APPDATA are not defined):
  `C:\Users\[User]\MCSRHermes\instances\[PID].json`
- Mac:
  `~/Library/Application Support/MCSRHermes/instances/[PID].json`
- Linux (if XDG_RUNTIME_DIR is defined):
  `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/MCSRHermes/instances/[PID].json`
- Linux (if XDG_RUNTIME_DIR is not defined):
  `~/.local/share/MCSRHermes/instances/[PID].json`

When making software that uses Hermes, it's recommended to copy the logic from `private static Path getGlobalPath()`
in [HermesMod.java](src/main/java/me/duncanruns/hermes/HermesMod.java).

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/alive`

A file used to indicate that the instance is still alive. The first 8 bytes are the PID, and the next 8 are the
timestamp which is updated every second. The file should be deleted on exit, but bad shutdowns may lead to the file
lingering. To check for the existence of an instance, first check for the [PID].json file, optionally check with the OS
if a process with that PID exists, then check if the PID in the `[Game Directory]/hermes/alive` file matches, and that
the timestamp is within a reasonable range.

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/state.json`

A file that updates with a few useful pieces of information for external tools and macros. This serves as a practical
replacement for the state output mod. Contained in the file is:

- The current screen (class, title, if pause screen)
- The current world (null while not in a world)
- The last joined world (null until first world join)

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/latest_world_log.txt`

- Contains the path of the latest `worlds_[timestamp created].log` file.

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/world_logs/worlds_[Timestamp Created].log`

A log of worlds entered and exited where each line is a valid json object. Each object contains a log type (`entering`
or `leave`), the world's save folder path, and the time. The word `entering` is chosen as it can either mean the world
is being loaded into, or the world is already loaded and the player is just entering it (Pressing play on a SeedQueue
world). This means that worlds generating in the background (e.g. via SeedQueue) will not be logged unless the player
enters it. Note that fast resets are not distinguished from regular world exits. The play log can be used to determine
if the world properly saved.

### `[Game Directory]/saves/[World Name]/hermes/play.log`

> Data related to player activity in the world will logged in real-time in a ciphered format in a "restricted" folder
> that most external tools should not be able to access (The cipher isn't very secure, and is only meant to convey
> intention). Then on server shutdown (world exit), an unciphered copy is made. A warning.txt file is also placed in the
> restricted folder to make it extra obvious.

- `initialize` - Runs when the play log is initialized (creating or joining a world), contains game version, Hermes
  version, generator options, entered seed (if creating), the world time (total ticks ran in world, should be 0 for new
  world), and if atum is installed, a field noting if atum is running.
- `stat` - Every stat update, the player it's for, the new value, and the difference from the last one. Excludes
  stats that naturally update every tick or extremely spammy ones (e.g. walking/sprinting/flying)
- `screen` - Every screen change, the class (will look like class_xxxxx bc of intermediary), the title (
  untranslated key, or sometimes the text in case of a renamed container), if the screen is supposed to pause the game.
- `advancement` - Every advancement update, the criteria earned, the player it's for, and if it is completed. It
  also contains the "display" data for the advancement (hidden, announce to chat, show toast).
- `dimension` - Every change to a player's dimension as well as their initial dimension when they join.
- `respawn` - Every time a player respawns, the player who respawned, the position they respawned at, and if they were
  alive before (e.g. `true` if coming out of the end). The dimension of the respawn can be determined by the
  `dimension` event (no order guaranteed).
- `inside_structures` - A list of names of structures that a player is currently inside. Only logs when the list of
  structures changes to prevent redundant logs, although relogging may result in duplicate logs. The check runs every 20
  ticks, similar to advancements.
- `game_info` - The "Game Info" whenever a change happens to it. If a field is not present, that means it hasn't changed
  from the last `game_info` event. Game Info includes:
    - Non-default Game Rules
    - If cheats are allowed
    - If the world is opened to LAN
    - Hardcore/difficulty/difficulty locked
    - Default Gamemode
    - Datapacks/enabled datapacks
    - Player Infos
        - Names
        - Uuids
        - Gamemodes
- `inventory_slots` - Every update to a player's inventory, checked every tick. If a slot isn't changed, it won't be
  logged. The inventory can be assumed empty from player join, and the entire inventory will be logged again if a player
  relogs with items.
    - This exists as stats aren't accurate enough to determine full item history because of taking from chests and such,
      and adding events for those specific missing parts would more be complex than just logging the actual inventory.
- `status_effects` - All status effects and their amplifier for each player. Updates for a player if they gain/lose a
  status effect, if the amplifier changes, or they relog with effects.
- `command`- Every command ran by a player and who entered it.
- `world_saved` - Every time a world (a specific dimension) is saved, and a string representing which world it is (may
  vary based on game
  version).
- `players_saved` - Runs when all player data is saved.
- `server_shutdown` - Runs when the server shuts down, even if using fast reset, includes a list of worlds saved during
  the shutdown process and if player data was saved during the shutdown process, which is useful for determining if fast
  reset was used.
- `close` - Runs when the play log is closed, which is when the server shuts down, or when the game exits.

All of these events will be logged with currentTimeMillis and speedrunigt times if available (rta, igt, retime)

### `[Game Directory]/saves/[World Name]/hermes/ghosts/[Player UUID].ghost`

Ghosts contain enough information to fully animate what a player looked like during the run (minus inventory data which
can be found in the play log). The data is taken from the server-side player, so might not accurately represent the
exact path or states of the client-side player. The data is saved as its raw bytes for file size purposes; every 42
bytes represents a single tick for that player. The layout is as follows:

| Byte(s)   | Type               | Description          |
|-----------|--------------------|----------------------|
| 0-7       | long               | Timestamp            |
| 8-15      | double             | X Position           |
| 16-23     | double             | Y Position           |
| 24-31     | double             | Z Position           |
| 32-35     | float              | Yaw                  |
| 36-39     | float              | Pitch                |
| 40-43     | float              | Health               |
| 44 (0xF0) | N/A                | 4 unused bits        |
| 44 (0x0F) | 4-bit unsigned int | Selected Hotbar Slot |
| 45        | N/A                | Flags (see below)    |

The flags are as follows:

| Bitmask | Description                                     |
|---------|-------------------------------------------------|
| 0x01    | Is swinging hand (mining, placing blocks, etc.) |
| 0x02    | Is using an item (shield, bow, etc.)            |
| 0x04    | Is sneaking                                     |
| 0x08    | Is sprinting                                    |
| 0x10    | Is hit cooldown active (being visually red)     |
| 0x20    | Is alive                                        |
| 0x40    | Is fall flying (Elytra gliding) (1.9+)          |
| 0x80    | Is swimming (1.13+)                             |

Ghosts can be used by stat trackers to calculate what bastions were visited, or be used to create a ghost replay like
those in Mario Kart or Trackmania. While Hermes creates the data for this, it is important to note that **Hermes itself
is not a replay mod and cannot replay ghosts**.

## For Dedicated Servers

Hermes can be used on dedicated servers, but there are a few things to note:

- The "should show toast" field in advancement data is not available on the server, as that data is client-side only.
- The state.json file will not contain screen data as there is no client, and also won't contain the last world joined
  data as there is no client to join from. The field that Hermes provides for the current world will be accurate and
  unchanging.
- The world log will not exist, as there is no client to join worlds from.

## Developing

This section contains some notes for those looking to contribute to Hermes or use its API. Make sure to also read
the [ideology](#ideology) section if you want a better understanding of the mod.

### API

A `me.duncanruns.hermes.api.HermesModAPI` class is provided for modders to use Hermes' features. Its methods have
javadoc comments somewhat explaining their usage. Refer to the documentation of features above to get a better idea of
what the methods might be used for.

### Disabling Features

Certain features of Hermes may be disabled by other mods. To disable features, add the following to your mod's
`fabric.mod.json`:

```json
{
  "//": "...",
  "custom": {
    "hermes:disable": [
      "playlog",
      "ghost"
    ]
  }
}
```

All features that can be disabled are included in the example above.

### Codebase Structure

For working on Hermes, a few notes on how the codebase is structured:

- `me.duncanruns.hermes` - The main mod class and some utilities
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.api` - The public API for other mods to use
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.[feature]` - Implementations of features, ideally should not reference each other
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin` - General mixins that apply on both client and server
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin.[client/server]` - General mixins that apply on only client or server
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin.[feature]` - Mixins specific to a feature that apply on both client and server
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin.[feature].[client/server]` - Mixins specific to a feature that apply on only client or
  server

## Ideology

The most core ideology of Hermes is **no data interpretation**.

Data interpretation can be defined as any sort of processing or logic applied to raw data.

The data that Hermes outputs should be as close to the raw data as possible. There should exist no concept of
speedrunning splits such as "blinds" or likewise, but rather such a concept should be able to be determined by external
tools using the data Hermes provides. This comes with the following benefits:

- Easier development: The mod is simpler as it just outputs data. The mixins are simpler, and as a whole the mod is
  easier to port to other versions.
- Less updating: Whenever a tool wants to do something new and unique, it is less likely that Hermes will need to be
  updated to support it.

An example of data interpretation can be found within Hermes regarding the `stat` event. Certain stats are
excluded from the event because they are updated every tick and are not very useful. This is data interpretation as it
**conditionally** filters out data. Unfortunately, this is necessary to keep reasonable file sizes.

Prior to Hermes, mods would output very heavily interpreted data. This lead to those mods needing updates, which lead to
more mod development time, delays merging PRs, delays waiting for mod legalization, and demotivation.

While the goal of Hermes is to cover all external tool use cases at the time of development and in the future, of course
it is possible that a use case will come up that Hermes does not support. It would probably be ignorant to think that
all possible use cases are already covered.

Commit message:

Move getJsonDifference, add `speedrunigt_options`

README.md, after:

<img src="src/main/resources/assets/hermes/icon.png" width="128" alt="Hermes Logo">

# Hermes

Hermes is a mod that outputs a lot of information about the game for external tools to use. It provides no configuration
or in-game functionality.

## Features

### `[PID].json`

On initialize, a json file named [PID].json (PID = process id) will be placed in a global location and contain the game
path, Hermes world log path, game version, all fabric mods loaded (display names, ids, versions), and disabled
features (other mods can disable Hermes features). A shared lock is held on the file to indicate the instance is still
alive. The file should be deleted on exit, but bad shutdowns may lead to the file lingering. A copy of the file will
also be made in `[Game Directory]/hermes/instances/`, and will also be locked and deleted on exit.

Locations:

- For all platforms, inside the game directory:
  `[Game Directory]/hermes/instances/[PID].json`
- Windows (if LOCALAPPDATA is defined):
  `C:\Users\[User]\AppData\Local\MCSRHermes\instances\[PID].json`
- Windows (if LOCALAPPDATA is not defined, but APPDATA is):
  `C:\Users\[User]\AppData\Roaming\MCSRHermes\instances\[PID].json`
- Windows (if LOCALAPPDATA and APPDATA are not defined):
  `C:\Users\[User]\MCSRHermes\instances\[PID].json`
- Mac:
  `~/Library/Application Support/MCSRHermes/instances/[PID].json`
- Linux (if XDG_RUNTIME_DIR is defined):
  `$XDG_RUNTIME_DIR/MCSRHermes/instances/[PID].json`
- Linux (if XDG_RUNTIME_DIR is not defined):
  `~/.local/share/MCSRHermes/instances/[PID].json`

When making software that uses Hermes, it's recommended to copy the logic from `private static Path getGlobalPath()`
in [HermesMod.java](src/main/java/me/duncanruns/hermes/HermesMod.java).

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/alive`

A file used to indicate that the instance is still alive. The first 8 bytes are the PID, and the next 8 are the
timestamp which is updated every second. The file should be deleted on exit, but bad shutdowns may lead to the file
lingering. To check for the existence of an instance, first check for the [PID].json file, optionally check with the OS
if a process with that PID exists, then check if the PID in the `[Game Directory]/hermes/alive` file matches, and that
the timestamp is within a reasonable range.

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/state.json`

A file that updates with a few useful pieces of information for external tools and macros. This serves as a practical
replacement for the state output mod. Contained in the file is:

- The current screen (class, title, if pause screen)
- The current world (null while not in a world)
- The last joined world (null until first world join)

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/latest_world_log.txt`

- Contains the path of the latest `worlds_[timestamp created].log` file.

### `[Game Directory]/hermes/world_logs/worlds_[Timestamp Created].log`

A log of worlds entered and exited where each line is a valid json object. Each object contains a log type (`entering`
or `leave`), the world's save folder path, and the time. The word `entering` is chosen as it can either mean the world
is being loaded into, or the world is already loaded and the player is just entering it (Pressing play on a SeedQueue
world). This means that worlds generating in the background (e.g. via SeedQueue) will not be logged unless the player
enters it. Note that fast resets are not distinguished from regular world exits. The play log can be used to determine
if the world properly saved.

### `[Game Directory]/saves/[World Name]/hermes/play.log`

> Data related to player activity in the world will logged in real-time in a ciphered format in a "restricted" folder
> that most external tools should not be able to access (The cipher isn't very secure, and is only meant to convey
> intention). Then on server shutdown (world exit), an unciphered copy is made. A warning.txt file is also placed in the
> restricted folder to make it extra obvious.

- `initialize` - Runs when the play log is initialized (creating or joining a world), contains game version, Hermes
  version, generator options, entered seed (if creating), the world time (total ticks ran in world, should be 0 for new
  world), and if atum is installed, a field noting if atum is running.
- `stat` - Every stat update, the player it's for, the new value, and the difference from the last one. Excludes
  stats that naturally update every tick or extremely spammy ones (e.g. walking/sprinting/flying)
- `screen` - Every screen change, the class (will look like class_xxxxx bc of intermediary), the title (
  untranslated key, or sometimes the text in case of a renamed container), if the screen is supposed to pause the game.
- `advancement` - Every advancement update, the criteria earned, the player it's for, and if it is completed. It
  also contains the "display" data for the advancement (hidden, announce to chat, show toast).
- `dimension` - Every change to a player's dimension as well as their initial dimension when they join.
- `respawn` - Every time a player respawns, the player who respawned, the position they respawned at, and if they were
  alive before (e.g. `true` if coming out of the end). The dimension of the respawn can be determined by the
  `dimension` event (no order guaranteed).
- `inside_structures` - A list of names of structures that a player is currently inside. Only logs when the list of
  structures changes to prevent redundant logs, although relogging may result in duplicate logs. The check runs every 20
  ticks, similar to advancements.
- `game_info` - The "Game Info" whenever a change happens to it. If a field is not present, that means it hasn't changed
  from the last `game_info` event. Game Info includes:
    - Non-default Game Rules
    - If cheats are allowed
    - If the world is opened to LAN
    - Hardcore/difficulty/difficulty locked
    - Default Gamemode
    - Datapacks/enabled datapacks
    - Player Infos
        - Names
        - Uuids
        - Gamemodes
- `inventory_slots` - Every update to a player's inventory, checked every tick. If a slot isn't changed, it won't be
  logged. The inventory can be assumed empty from player join, and the entire inventory will be logged again if a player
  relogs with items.
    - This exists as stats aren't accurate enough to determine full item history because of taking from chests and such,
      and adding events for those specific missing parts would more be complex than just logging the actual inventory.
- `status_effects` - All status effects and their amplifier for each player. Updates for a player if they gain/lose a
  status effect, if the amplifier changes, or they relog with effects.
- `command`- Every command ran by a player and who entered it.
- `world_saved` - Every time a world (a specific dimension) is saved, and a string representing which world it is (may
  vary based on game
  version).
- `players_saved` - Runs when all player data is saved.
- `server_shutdown` - Runs when the server shuts down, even if using fast reset, includes a list of worlds saved during
  the shutdown process and if player data was saved during the shutdown process, which is useful for determining if fast
  reset was used.
- `close` - Runs when the play log is closed, which is when the server shuts down, or when the game exits.
- `speedrunigt_options` - Various options for the mod SpeedRunIGT. Logs whenever an option changes.

All of these events will be logged with currentTimeMillis and speedrunigt times if available (rta, igt, retime)

### `[Game Directory]/saves/[World Name]/hermes/ghosts/[Player UUID].ghost`

Ghosts contain enough information to fully animate what a player looked like during the run (minus inventory data which
can be found in the play log). The data is taken from the server-side player, so might not accurately represent the
exact path or states of the client-side player. The data is saved as its raw bytes for file size purposes; every 42
bytes represents a single tick for that player. The layout is as follows:

| Byte(s)   | Type               | Description          |
|-----------|--------------------|----------------------|
| 0-7       | long               | Timestamp            |
| 8-15      | double             | X Position           |
| 16-23     | double             | Y Position           |
| 24-31     | double             | Z Position           |
| 32-35     | float              | Yaw                  |
| 36-39     | float              | Pitch                |
| 40-43     | float              | Health               |
| 44 (0xF0) | N/A                | 4 unused bits        |
| 44 (0x0F) | 4-bit unsigned int | Selected Hotbar Slot |
| 45        | N/A                | Flags (see below)    |

The flags are as follows:

| Bitmask | Description                                     |
|---------|-------------------------------------------------|
| 0x01    | Is swinging hand (mining, placing blocks, etc.) |
| 0x02    | Is using an item (shield, bow, etc.)            |
| 0x04    | Is sneaking                                     |
| 0x08    | Is sprinting                                    |
| 0x10    | Is hit cooldown active (being visually red)     |
| 0x20    | Is alive                                        |
| 0x40    | Is fall flying (Elytra gliding) (1.9+)          |
| 0x80    | Is swimming (1.13+)                             |

Ghosts can be used by stat trackers to calculate what bastions were visited, or be used to create a ghost replay like
those in Mario Kart or Trackmania. While Hermes creates the data for this, it is important to note that **Hermes itself
is not a replay mod and cannot replay ghosts**.

## For Dedicated Servers

Hermes can be used on dedicated servers, but there are a few things to note:

- The "should show toast" field in advancement data is not available on the server, as that data is client-side only.
- The state.json file will not contain screen data as there is no client, and also won't contain the last world joined
  data as there is no client to join from. The field that Hermes provides for the current world will be accurate and
  unchanging.
- The world log will not exist, as there is no client to join worlds from.

## Developing

This section contains some notes for those looking to contribute to Hermes or use its API. Make sure to also read
the [ideology](#ideology) section if you want a better understanding of the mod.

### API

A `me.duncanruns.hermes.api.HermesModAPI` class is provided for modders to use Hermes' features. Its methods have
javadoc comments somewhat explaining their usage. Refer to the documentation of features above to get a better idea of
what the methods might be used for.

### Disabling Features

Certain features of Hermes may be disabled by other mods. To disable features, add the following to your mod's
`fabric.mod.json`:

```json
{
  "//": "...",
  "custom": {
    "hermes:disable": [
      "playlog",
      "ghost"
    ]
  }
}
```

All features that can be disabled are included in the example above.

### Codebase Structure

For working on Hermes, a few notes on how the codebase is structured:

- `me.duncanruns.hermes` - The main mod class and some utilities
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.api` - The public API for other mods to use
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.[feature]` - Implementations of features, ideally should not reference each other
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin` - General mixins that apply on both client and server
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin.[client/server]` - General mixins that apply on only client or server
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin.[feature]` - Mixins specific to a feature that apply on both client and server
- `me.duncanruns.hermes.mixin.[feature].[client/server]` - Mixins specific to a feature that apply on only client or
  server

## Ideology

The most core ideology of Hermes is **no data interpretation**.

Data interpretation can be defined as any sort of processing or logic applied to raw data.

The data that Hermes outputs should be as close to the raw data as possible. There should exist no concept of
speedrunning splits such as "blinds" or likewise, but rather such a concept should be able to be determined by external
tools using the data Hermes provides. This comes with the following benefits:

- Easier development: The mod is simpler as it just outputs data. The mixins are simpler, and as a whole the mod is
  easier to port to other versions.
- Less updating: Whenever a tool wants to do something new and unique, it is less likely that Hermes will need to be
  updated to support it.

An example of data interpretation can be found within Hermes regarding the `stat` event. Certain stats are
excluded from the event because they are updated every tick and are not very useful. This is data interpretation as it
**conditionally** filters out data. Unfortunately, this is necessary to keep reasonable file sizes.

Prior to Hermes, mods would output very heavily interpreted data. This lead to those mods needing updates, which lead to
more mod development time, delays merging PRs, delays waiting for mod legalization, and demotivation.

While the goal of Hermes is to cover all external tool use cases at the time of development and in the future, of course
it is possible that a use case will come up that Hermes does not support. It would probably be ignorant to think that
all possible use cases are already covered.
